So in this video, we're gonna
start talking about a linked list.
This is another top list and we've
already dealt with arrays in general.
We've talked about those extensively and
of course we also
talked about the ArrayList and we've used
them quite a bit in the code as well.
So the linked list is
another type of list.
So just as a recap,
you will need to know this because
of the way that linked lists work.
We've already seen that an array's
an index list of items.
So they can be primitive types for
example, ints, doubles, those types of
things in the case of a normal array.
Or of course we can also use objects
in the case of an ArrayList and
actually store them like that.
So we've seen how to access individual
elements by using an index.
So the sixth item, for example,
would be found at index position five.
So just as a quick recap,
let's just look at this on the screen.
You can see there that we've actually got
an array on screen of seven integers.
So in the index position to the left
is the number that we use to
access the particular value.
So the first element of course
we use index position 0.
He grabs the value 34, index position 1,
grabs the value of 18, so on and so forth.
Now what happens internally, and
this is important to get a good
understanding of linked lists,
is that java will actually allocate
four bytes of memory, for each integer.
Because it needs up to that amount to be
able to store the highest value integer,
and we have talked about that
in much earlier in the course,
about how that memory works.
So, you can see what happens there is that
Java will try to do this contiguously.
So you can see in this case what is,
stand is actually a formula that Java can
used to actually figure out which address,
which physical memory address
to use to grab the value.
So what it can do quite simply,
it can look at the base address.
This is actually for
the first element in the array.
So this would be index position 0.
So you can actually use that formula, and
what I can actually do is calculate
the actual address based on that.
So in other words,
looking at the base address,
which in this case is 100 plus
four times the index number.
So for example, if we want to get access
to the actual third index position.
Se we would actually would
multiply index position 3
by 4 because four bytes in each integer so
that's 3 times 4 is 12.
We would add that to our base address
which was 100 which was the first element.
And that would give us
an answer of 112 and
you can see on the screen that index
position 3, it's value is 112.
So that's how Java sort of
handles things internally and
this type of thing works for
primitive types much the same way.
In the example of a double for
arguments sake well it uses up to eight
bytes of memory for each double, because
it needs that for flagging point numbers.
So the same format would apply, we would
actually still do the calculation but
instead of doing, multiplying by four,
for four bytes for an integer.
We multiply by eight,
which is eight bytes for a double.
So that works fine for perimeter types
where you've got a known value and
it's always gonna be the same link.
For example, an integer is always going
to contribute four bytes of memory.
A double will always consume eight bytes.
But what about strings?
Strings don't actually work the same,
do they?
Because strings of course
can be a variable size.
And this also applies in
general to objects as well.
So as you can see on the screen,
now I'm gonna switch to the next slide.
What's actually happening here
is that we've got the same
index to the left-hand side,
the same array.
This time it's actually got
strings instead of integers, and
we've got the same number.
And you can see that there's
actually a calculation there.
It's eight bytes.
So what's happening is that
the memory that's being allocated
in the array is actually
itself eight bytes.
But that actually points to another
location in memory where the string is.
So consequently by doing that,
Java can actually keep up track of the
actual strings that are in the array and
also the strings can each be a variable
link, so they can be different links.
Because of course strings can be
a variable link to unlock an integer which
has to be and always is four bytes.
So, you can see
the important concept there.
Array, index position 0,
which is at a memory location, 100.
It's got a string address of 1034 and
then, looking at the memory
address of a position on the address of
1034, it's actually got the string value.
In this case, of 2.
And likewise, we looked at another one for
argument's sake.
Index position 3.
Well, that's got a string
address of 1024 and
that points to
the Hello World as a string.
So, that's what's happening internally.
Now if we actually printed that
out we actually went through and
did a full even though
she printed that out.
The actual order that would
come out is actually Tim,
Australia, Java, Hello World,
Done, Array and ArrayList.
Because of course it's actually going
through the index positions from 0 to 6.
Plus looking at the first
one pointing 1024, Tim.
Looking at the next one,
index position one, 1037, Australia.
Looking at position two, 1046 is
the string address, that's gonna be Java.
So on and so forth.
So requesting the stringed
index position three causes
java to calculate the address
of that item in the array.
So 100 + 3 x 8 bytes = 124.
That's it's dislocation here.
But it then actually uses
the string address to actually find
the actual string.
So that's what's actually happening
internally by Java automatically.
It's not something you need
to know too much about.
Another thing to note is, with all these
strings over here to the right hand side
once your program stops executing, or
goes out of scope in some way, and then
the variables are no longer needed and
there's this process called Java's Garbage
collection which goes through
automatically and frees up that memory.
So it releases it.
So it can actually be used again.
So that again has all been
happening behind the scenes, and
it's not something you
need to worry about.
And just a final point
here to make is that
the actual string addresses
do not need to be contiguous.
So in other words you can see here that
one of the string address here for
index position 4 is actually address 4000,
but some of the other ones have
got completely different numbers.
So the point here is that things
can be completely different, and
that's the way that it happens and
it's done internally by Java.
So just as a sort of further
understanding, let's go and
just write some quick code
to actually go through this.
In my window, I've created a new project,
LinkedList, so
I'm gonna create a new
class called customer.
And it's going to have two fields.
It's gonna have a name and
a value or double I should say.
Product string name, private double.
We'll call that balance.
Going to create a constructor.
Both of the fields as constructors and
let's just create a getter and
a setter for both even though
we probably won't use them but
we'll do that anyway just for simplicity.
Very basic class and
you've seen it a number of times before
but let's go back to our main method now.
Actually let's just create some code.
So we're gonna start off
by actually creating a new
instance of the class a new customer.
Customer = new Customer("Tim") and
let's try a value of $54.96.
Then let's create a second object for
this customer.
We'll call it anotherCustomer.
Then let's set anotherCustomer
equal to customer.
So we're setting it to the customer class,
to the first one as you can see there.
But then let's set the other
customer class, the second one,
let's use the setBalance method and
change the actual balance to $12.18.
And then just to confirm it,
let's actually print out a message.
Balance for customer, and
customer.getName is customer.getBalance.
Now before I execute that,
what do you think will actually happen?
Just as a recap,
we've created a new object here,
new instance of the customer class,
and we've assigned the value to 54.96.
We then created a second customer class
called anotherCustomer, another instance.
And we set the value of this
second class to the first object,
the first instance that we created.
We then actually set the value of
the actual balance field to 12 dollars,
18 using the setter for the second class.
But what we're doing here is we're
actually printing out the value
of the first class.
So what do you actually
think will happen here?
What value should we get?
We get to the value 5496 or 12 dollars 18.
Let's just run it and see and
then we'll talk about it.
Now you can see what's
actually happened here is,
we've actually got a balance of $12.18.
And looking at that code, you might first
be wondering, well, why has that happened,
because isn't this actually
another class altogether?
So why does changing the balance of this
second class affect the first class?
And this is an important
point to understand,
because it relates to this memory.
So what actually happens is when
we actually do this assignment,
anotherCustomer = customer, what we
were doing internally, Java was actually
assigning the second customer
class to point to the first class.
So in other words it just
saved the memory address.
It didn't create a separate class.
So this is really important to
understand what's working there.
So as a result of not only
saving the memory address,
when we used the set balance command,
what that actually did was,
it actually saved the value
in this original location.
So for all intents and purposes,
there's only class here.
Customer class is the first class,
and another customer,
the second one that we created,
is actually pointing to the first one.
So consequently, when we use
the setBalance method on the second class,
it actually updated the first class.
And that's all because of how memory
is used and allocated within Java.
And we'll close that now.
So if Java doesn't let us use pointers,
in other words we can't actually
point to these objects directly,
why are we discussing them?
Look, it's important to understand all
this before we can understand what
a linked list is and the advantages
that it can give you over an array.
So let's just consider some more code now.
Gonna create some code that
creates a basic ArrayList.
ArrayList of integers.
Of Course intList = new ArrayList.
So, let's add some values.
IntList.add(1).
IntList.add(3).
IntList.add(4).
Then we use for(int i=0; i<intList.size().
You've seen this eight times before.
We're just gonna show the values of what
element i +": " + intLists.get (i)).
That's just gonna show the output
of each element in the array.
Next, we'll actually add another entry.
IntLists .add, but what we're gonna
do here is we're gonna put 1, 2.
And what that actually does,
that's inserting the actual number,
in this case the number 2,
in index position one.
So in other words it's gonna add the
number starting the first element position
was position zero of course
which was at the value of one.
We're using element so
index position one, which should
start immediately after the one.
So in other words it's the second element.
And we're storing the value of two.
So let's just confirm if that works.
And we'll actually do a print
out after that as well.
So that's now running.
So what should happen is the first time,
we get three outputs,
three entries that are in the array list.
And the second time we
should get four entries.
So let's just run that.
So you can see on the screen,
there we've got element zero.
Zero's got the value of one,
one's got value of three,
two's got the value of four.
The second time around you can see
that clearly this has been inserted.
So what's actually
happened is in order for
that to be inserted, the other
entries all have to be moved down.
So the element position two,
the value of three in element
position three with a value of four.
If it had to be moved down to
make space for this new entry.
Now this is not a big deal in terms
of computer processing time when
we're dealing with a small array
as you can see on the screen here.
We've got three or four elements, but
when we actually start talking about
an array containing thousands,
perhaps millions of existing records or
existing items is coming
in a lot slower to process.
In other words, it's a lot more work the
computer has to do because there's just so
many more records to process.
And similarly if you have to remove an
item from an array, what actually has to
happen is all the other items have
to be moved up to fill the gap.
So in other words, if we actually
deleted this position, this element one,
then elements two and three would have
to be moved up to fill that space again.
So you can see there's a lot of
manipulation by the computer required
to actually do that.
Now that's not a problem for a small
number of records but when you start
dealing with a large numbers of records,
it can quickly become overwhelming for
the computer and it starts slowing down
and starts using a lot of resources.
So we've finally got to the stage
now of talking about linked lists.
Well the linked list is
an alternative to arrays, and
it's really useful in some situations.
And how it works is it actually stores
the actual link to the next item
in the list as well as the actual data,
so hence the name linked list.
So in other words each element in the list
actually holds a link to the item that
follows it, as well as the actual value
you're wanting to actually store as well.
So, good example of that is to go back and
look at our lists that
we talked about earlier.
And I'll go back on the screen and
show you that.
So that's our original string
list that we talked about.
If we go to the next screen this
is how a linked list works.
So you can see in this case the first
element which was the value of 10 which we
had assigned a value of
the memory address of 1,037.
You can see that it now points to
the next one, which is Australia,
the value of Australia, at position 1046.
It then points to the next one,
which is Java at position 1024, and so
on and so forth.
So if we created a linked list like
this we could literally iterate through
the lists of items in it.
We could start on the first one, and
what that code would be doing is we'll be
checking to see whether the link has
got anything else attached to it.
In other words,
whether it's linking to anything.
If it does we pick up the string, store it
at the location and actually save that so
in that case if you've got a linked
list like this we can literally
iterate through the items in it.
So you can see starting at a memory
address of 1,034 it has gotten appointed
to the value of 10 which is actually
on a different memory address.
We then look to see whether there's
something else that particular record,
that entry has, is linked to and we can
actually follow that through the list.
So you can say that Tim,
effectively the entry Tim,
points to Australia which points to Java,
which points to Hello World,
which points to Done,
which points to Array, etc.
Different completely to
how an ArrayList works.
Further example, let's just say that
we're looking at this linked list and
it's got some values as you can see there.
It's actually a list of places but
perhaps you might wanna visit
when you're in Australia.
In this case you wanna start at Sydney,
you wanna then go to Melbourne,
go to Brisbane and Perth and so
on and ultimately end up in Darwin.
Well let's just say that
after creating this list
you decided to add a visit to
Alice Springs on the way to Melbourne.
So what we need to do is we insert
Alice Springs after Sydney.
Now with a traditional array you'd
actually have to move all the other cities
down to make room for that, as you saw in
the code we just showed on the screen but
with the linked list it's
actually a heck of alot easier.
In fact all we would have to do
is actually set Alice Springs,
the actual Alice Springs link if you
will to point to wherever Sydney
was pointing to originally
which was Melbourne.
And then we set Sydney to
point to Alice Springs.
So you can see that's
a heck of a lot easier.
No records have actually had to be
moved down to make room for anything.
All that's happened is we created
a new entry which is Alice Springs,
we pointed Alice Springs to where Sydney
used to point to, which was Melbourne, and
then we set Sydney to
point to Alice Springs.
And therefore, we can still sort
of go through that list and
get to all the records that way.
And in a similar way,
we go to the next screen we can
actually remove entries the same way.
So in this example, for example,
if we decided not to visit Perth,
then all we would need to do is just
make Brisbane point to wherever
Perth was originally pointing to, and
that's literally all you need to do.
So in this case you can see that we've
changed Brisbane which was pointing to
Perth, to point to Canberra.
So we looked at Perth, and figured out
that okay, Perth was pointing to Canberra.
We changed Brisbane to
point directly to Canberra.
I'm thinking that's
a function of a linked list.
It's interesting to note here that
Perth is still pointing to Canberra.
But because nothing is now
referring to Perth anymore,
because Brisbane is now
referring to Canberra,
the object will be automatically destroyed
by Java during its garbage collection.
So in other words, it'll figure out
that this is no longer being used,
this is Perth I'm talking about,
and remove that automatically.
So that's really the idea
of a linked list.
So we're gonna stop the video here.
In the next video we'll
actually create some code.
We'll actually create a linked list in
Java code and go through this example so
you can understand it
from a code perspective.
So I'll see you in that next video.